 🔐 Access Token & Refresh Token – Notes

 What is an Access Token?

An Access Token is a short-lived authentication token issued by the server after a successful login. It is attached to every protected API request to verify the user's identity and authorize access to resources.

 Characteristics

 Short-lived (10 seconds in this example)
 Sent with every protected API request
 Used for authentication and authorization
 Contains user information (claims) and an expiry time
 Becomes invalid after its expiration time

 What is a Refresh Token?

A Refresh Token is a long-lived authentication token that is used to obtain a new Access Token when the current Access Token expires.

 Characteristics

 Long-lived (20 seconds in this example)
 Used only to request a new Access Token
 Not sent with every API request
 Helps keep the user logged in without requiring repeated logins
 Has its own expiration time

 Authentication Flow

 Step 1: User Login

The user logs in using valid credentials (such as email and password). After successful authentication, the server generates:

 An Access Token
 A Refresh Token

Both tokens are returned to the client and stored securely (typically in HttpOnly Cookies or secure storage).

 Step 2: Access Protected Resources

Whenever the user accesses a protected API:

 The client sends the Access Token.
 The server validates the Access Token.
 If the token is valid, the server processes the request and returns the requested data.

During this phase, the Refresh Token is not used.

 Step 3: Access Token Expires

Since the Access Token has a short lifespan, it eventually expires.

When the client sends an expired Access Token:

 The server rejects the request.
 A 401 Unauthorized response is returned.

Instead of asking the user to log in again, the client automatically sends the Refresh Token to the server.


 Step 4: Generate a New Access Token

The server validates the Refresh Token.

If the Refresh Token is still valid:

 The server generates a new Access Token.
 The new Access Token is returned to the client.
 The original API request is retried automatically.
 The user continues using the application without interruption.

This process happens in the background and is completely transparent to the user.

 Step 5: Refresh Token Expires

The Refresh Token also has an expiration time.

When the client attempts to use an expired Refresh Token:

 The server rejects the refresh request.
 No new Access Token can be generated.
 A 401 Unauthorized response is returned.

 Step 6: User Logs In Again

Once both the Access Token and Refresh Token have expired:

 The user's session ends.
 The application redirects the user to the Login page.
 The user must authenticate again using valid credentials.
 The server generates a new Access Token and a new Refresh Token.

Why Use Two Tokens?

Using both Access Tokens and Refresh Tokens provides a balance between security and user convenience.

 Security

 Access Tokens are short-lived, reducing the risk if they are stolen.
 Even if an Access Token is compromised, it becomes useless after a short period.

 Better User Experience

 Users do not have to log in repeatedly.
 Refresh Tokens automatically generate new Access Tokens while they remain valid.
 Authentication is refreshed seamlessly in the background.

 Testing Configuratio

env
ACCESS_TOKEN_EXPIRY=10s
REFRESH_TOKEN_EXPIRY=20s

 Timeline

 0 seconds: User logs in and receives both tokens.
 0–10 seconds: Access Token is valid and used for all protected API requests.
 At 10 seconds: Access Token expires.
 10–20 seconds: Refresh Token is used to generate a new Access Token automatically without requiring the user to log in.
 At 20 seconds: Refresh Token expires.
 After 20 seconds: A new Access Token cannot be generated, and the user must log in again.

 Key Points to Remember

 The Access Token is used to access protected resources.
 The Refresh Token is used only to generate a new Access Token.
 Access Tokens are short-lived for improved security.
 Refresh Tokens are long-lived to provide a seamless user experience.
 If only the Access Token expires, the Refresh Token can generate a new Access Token automatically.
 If the Refresh Token also expires, the user must log in again to obtain a new pair of tokens.
 This two-token mechanism is widely used in modern authentication systems because it offers both strong security and a smooth user experience.
